α-MnO2 catalyst was synthesized by a hydrothermal route. Aqueous solutions of KMnO4 and MnSO4 (molecular ratio = 2:1) were mixed and stirred vigorously for 30 min until a dark purple solution was formed. Afterwards, the solution was loaded to a Teflon-lined stainless steel vessel and heated at 180 °C for 12 h. After the reaction had run to completion, the brownish black precipitates were cooled down to room temperature; then the precipitate was separated by vacuum filtration; and last, washed to remove the unreacted material and soluble products. After being dried under vacuum at 100 °C for 6 h, the precipitate was dispersed by ball milling and dried under vacuum at 80 °C for 6 h to obtain the final products.
Phase identification of the prepared α-MnO2 was conducted by XRD analysis (DX2700, Dandong FangYuan Instrument Co., Ltd.). The morphology of the resulting α-MnO2 particles was observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nova 430, FEI Company in Netherlands). The surface area of the synthesized materials was studied using BET measurements (3H-2000PS1, BeiShiDe Instrument Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd.).
The air cathode was prepared on the nickel foam. An N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) slurry of PVDF was mixed with previously prepared α-MnO2, graphite (Tianjin BoDi CO., Ltd.) and Super P (Taiyuan city power battery material Co., Ltd.) in a weight ratio of 5:9:12:6, respectively. And the slurry was deposited over the nickel foam by using a doctor blade. Then the coated nickel foam was dried at 120 °C for 2 h in a vacuum oven. According to the method described above, α-MnO2, graphite and PVDF were combined at a weight ratio of 9:18:5, and α-MnO2, Super P and PVDF in the weight ratio of 9:27:6.6, respectively, to prepare a series of cathode sheets composed of different active materials.
Electrochemical characterizations were carried out using a coin type cell assembled in an Ar-filled dry glove box. A lithium foil was used as the anode electrode, celgard 2300 as the separator, and 1 M LiPF6 + EC + DMC (volume ratio of l:l:1) as the electrolyte. The cell was gas tight except for the stainless steel mesh window which was exposed at the porous cathode to ambient atmosphere. Finally, the cells with waterproof membranes made in-house were sealed in a bag for 12 h (Fig. 1).
All electrochemical investigation and characterization of the cell were conducted under ambient atmosphere. Linear scanning voltammetry tests were carried out by a three electrodes system on an electrochemistry workstation (CHI660, Shanghai ChenHua Co.). The working electrode was the as-prepared electrode (0.5 cm × 0.5 cm), Pt film electrode, a saturated calomel electrode was as the reference electrode, 0.1 mol/L NaOH solution as the electrolyte. The potential of the scan range was from φocp to−1.0 V, and the scan rate is 10 mV/s. Charge and discharge performance was conducted on a cell test system (CT2001A, Wuhan Jinnuo Electronics Co., Ltd.) at the voltage range of 2.0–4.2 V. A CHI660 electrochemistry workstation was employed to collect the cyclic voltammetry results of the cell at 2.0–4.2 V at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV/s. The conductivity was measured by AC impedance method using a frequency impedance analyzer (IM6e, Germany Zahner Co. LTD) in the range of 0.01–100 kHz. The amplitude of the AC potential signal was fixed at 5 mV for all measurements.